We are the sum of experiences that we encounter as we go through life. 
Day to day struggles and triumphs are experienced by all of the worlds creatures. 
As human beings, when we encounter a challenge, we have freedom to choose how to react. 
Every decision that we make leads us down a different road. We will never come to exactly the same crossroads. 
Every decision that we make has significance. The tiniest choice that we make reverberates throughout the entire universe.
I sleep in the clouds, dream in the sky,
Ill keep dreaming as life passes me by,
I think my dreams keep me sane,
I dream of happiness, a life without pain,
some people say Im stuck in this place,
and Ill never go anywhere,
but in my dreams Ive already been there,
I know some day Ill have to wake up,
but I feel the real world is more like a nightmare,
Im safe in my closed eye wonderland,
this poem goes to all the dreamers that understand,
no matter what they say...
keep your dreams but dont dream your life away,

Electoral systems are the detailed constitutional arrangements and voting systems that convert the vote into a political decision. The first step is to tally the votes, for which various vote counting systems and ballot types are used. Voting systems then determine the result on the basis of the tally. Most systems can be categorized as either proportional or majoritarian

When elections are called, politicians and their supporters attempt to influence policy by competing directly for the votes of constituents in what are called campaigns. Supporters for a campaign can be either formally organized or loosely affiliated, and frequently utilize campaign advertising. It is common for political scientists to attempt to predict elections via Political Forecasting methods

Ransomware is a type of malware that prevents or limits users aMMA from accessing their system, either by locking the system's screen or by locking the users' files unless a ransom is paid. More modern ransomware families, collectively categorized as crypto-ransomware, encrypt certain file types on infected systems and forces users to pay the ransom through certain online payment methods to get a decrypt key.
Ransom prices vary depending on the ransomware variant and the price or exchange rates of digital currencies. Thanks to the perceived anonymity offered by cryptocurrencies, ransomware operators commonly specify ransom payments in bitcoins. Recent ransomware variants ave also listed alternative payment options such as iTunes and Amazon gift cards. It should be noted, however, that paying the ransom does not guarantee that users will get the decryption key or unlock tool required to regain access to the infected system or hostaged files.
Users may encounter this threat through a variety of means. Ransomware can be downloaded onto systems when unwitting users visit malicious or compromised websites. It can also arrive as a payload either dropped or downloaded by other malware. Some ransomware are known to be delivered as attachments from spammed email, downloaded from malicious pages through malvertisements, or dropped by exploit kits onto vulnerable systems.

Once executed in the system, ransomware can either lock the computer screen, or, in the case of crypto-ransomware, encrypt predetermined files. In the first scenario, a full-screen image or notification is displayed on the infected system's screen, which prevents victims from using their system. This also shows the instructions on how users can pay for the ransom. The second type of ransomware prevents access to files to potentially critical or valuable files like documents and spreadsheets.

Ransomware is considered scareware as it forces users to pay a fee (or ransom) by scaring or intimidati them. In this sense, it is similar to FAKEAV malware, but instead of capturing the infected system or encrypting files, FAKEAV shows fake antimalware scanning results to coax users into purchasing bogus antimalware software.

But this massive wave wasn’t the only one. A few weeks later, a ransomware strain resembling Petya started spreading around Europe, affecting companies, Ukrainian institutions and banks, and even the even the radiation monitoring system at Chernobyl.

Ransomware has been a growing trend for the past two years, and this is just a culmination, a grand reveal to the wider world of just how big of a threat it is. But we’ve been writing about this for a while now.

The entity that creates the securities for sale is known as the issuer, and those that buy them are, of course, investors. Generally, securities represent an investment and a means by which municipalities, companies and other commercial enterprises can raise new capital. Companies can generate a lot of money when they go public, selling stock in an initial public offering, for example. City, state or county governments can raise funds for a particular project by floating a municipal bond issue. Depending on an institutions market demand or pricing structure, raising capital through securities can be a preferred alternative to financing through a bank loan.

Bearer securities are those that are negotiable and entitle the shareholder to the rights under the security. They are transferred from investor to investor, in certain cases by endorsement and delivery. In terms of proprietary nature, pre-electronic bearer securities were always divided, meaning each security constituted a separate asset, legally distinct from others in the ame issue. Depending on market practice, divided security assets can be fungible or less commonly non-fungible, meaning that upon lending, the borrower can return assets equivalent either to the original asset or to a specific identical asset at the end of the loan. In some cases, bearer ecuritie may be used to aid tax evasion, and thus can sometimes be viewed negatively by issuers, shareholders and fiscal regulatory bodies alike. They are therefore rare in the United States.
